mlir/docs/Dialects/ArmSME.md, before:

# 'ArmSME' Dialect

Basic dialect to target Arm SME.

This dialect defines custom and LLVM IR intrinsic operations that are used to
target Arm Scalable Matrix Extension. Through the available conversion and
ArmSME passes you can, for example, lower a
[linalg.matmul](https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/Linalg/#linalgmatmul-linalgmatmulop)
opereation to Arm SME
[FMOPA](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0602/2023-03/SME-Instructions/FMOPA--widening---Half-precision-floating-point-sum-of-outer-products-and-accumulate-)
(floating-point outer product) operations. See one of the in-tree end-to-end
integration tests for reference:

* [Linalg/CPU/ArmSME/matmul.mlir](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/mlir/test/Integration/Dialect/Linalg/CPU/ArmSME/matmul.mlir)
* [Vector/CPU/ArmSME/test-outerproduct-f64.mlir](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/mlir/test/Integration/Dialect/Vector/CPU/ArmSME/test-outerproduct-f64.mlir)

These tests are run "post-commit" by the
[clang-aarch64-sve-vla](https://lab.llvm.org/buildbot/#/builders/197) LLVM
BuildBot worker.

**References:**

* [The Scalable Matrix Extension (SME), for Armv9-A](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0616)
* [A64 -- SME Instructions (alphabetic order)](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0602/2023-03/SME-Instructions)

[TOC]

## Operations

[include "Dialects/ArmSMEOps.md"]

## Operations for LLVM IR Intrinsics

[include "Dialects/ArmSMEIntrinsicOps.md"]

Commit message:

[mlir][test] Make SME e2e tests require an emulator (#86489)
Integration tests for ArmSME require an emulator (there's no hardware
available). Make sure that CMake complains if `MLIR_RUN_ARM_SME_TESTS`
is set while `ARM_EMULATOR_EXECUTABLE` is empty.

I'm also adding a note in the docs for future reference.

mlir/docs/Dialects/ArmSME.md, after:

# 'ArmSME' Dialect

Basic dialect to target Arm SME.

This dialect defines custom and LLVM IR intrinsic operations that are used to
target Arm Scalable Matrix Extension. Through the available conversion and
ArmSME passes you can, for example, lower a
[linalg.matmul](https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/Linalg/#linalgmatmul-linalgmatmulop)
operation to Arm SME
[FMOPA](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0602/2023-03/SME-Instructions/FMOPA--widening---Half-precision-floating-point-sum-of-outer-products-and-accumulate-)
(floating-point outer product) operations. See one of the in-tree end-to-end
integration tests for reference:

* [Linalg/CPU/ArmSME/matmul.mlir](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/mlir/test/Integration/Dialect/Linalg/CPU/ArmSME/matmul.mlir)
* [Vector/CPU/ArmSME/test-outerproduct-f64.mlir](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/mlir/test/Integration/Dialect/Vector/CPU/ArmSME/test-outerproduct-f64.mlir)

In order to run ArmSME integration tests, include these flags in the CMake
invocation when configuring LLVM and MLIR:
```bash
  -DMLIR_INCLUDE_INTEGRATION_TESTS=On
  -DMLIR_RUN_ARM_SME_TESTS=On
  -DARM_EMULATOR_EXECUTABLE=<path-to-emulator> 
```

These tests are run "post-commit" by the
[clang-aarch64-sve-vla](https://lab.llvm.org/buildbot/#/builders/197) LLVM
BuildBot worker.

**References:**

* [The Scalable Matrix Extension (SME), for Armv9-A](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0616)
* [A64 -- SME Instructions (alphabetic order)](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0602/2023-03/SME-Instructions)

[TOC]

## Operations

[include "Dialects/ArmSMEOps.md"]

## Operations for LLVM IR Intrinsics

[include "Dialects/ArmSMEIntrinsicOps.md"]
